put on the tape recorder, and we're talking to Joan Hedrick.
And I'm interested in this whole process of, even with the tenor of your keynote address that you gave at that conference, you are at the forefront among scholars who are developing that canon of women writers.
Is that a fair statement?
Well, I suppose it is.
fair to say that one is always developing a canon in one way or another a lot of us like to think that we're trying to get away from the whole notion of canon a certain body of books that is somehow consecrated and special and lifted up above the others but of course inevitably as people start thinking and reading and writing about a certain body of text conversations develop around them they become
a canon in that way.
And so I think that is fair to say that we are, even as we dispute the notion of a center and a canon.
So your position then is that you don't like the idea of a canon, per se.
You say... I am typically, like, liberal on this question, divided because the problem with the great books is that
It rather artificially takes certain books out of their cultural context, makes them universal masterpieces, and by making them icons, I think it often makes access to them more difficult for students and for the general reader.
Pardon me, but you mean intellectual access?
Yeah.
Maybe you could explain that a little bit.
Well, it's something that's a masterpiece.
It, in some ways, becomes beyond certain kinds of criticism, I think, at various points.
It also, inevitably, when you have a canon, it excludes other books that aren't in the canon.
any any group of books that gets in there is selected by the people in the profession who have the most powerful voices and they have their own points of view and their own vision and those in one way or another attract them to the books that they choose so that their whole world views that get uh
represented by those books and other worldviews that get excluded.
So it's the exclusivity of a canon that I think is troubling.
Of course, the other side of it is if you don't
If there is no group of books that most people are reading and talking about, if everything is out there, then how can you have a conversation?
Nobody's read the same book.
So, I mean, I recognize the necessity of having such kinds of... Well, regrettably, I wasn't able to attend the conference, but certainly, judging from your remarks, there are any number of women who wrote in the 19th century who are totally forgotten, I mean, and who are ignored.
And it seems to me that...
Part of what you're trying to accomplish is to... To bring them back.
To bring them back.
To bring them into the canon.
Absolutely.
Yes.
I mean, we're working with the structures we have, and that's... And how does the process work?
How do you discover things?
How do you determine that writers who are totally unknown to not only students, but to, you know, readers like myself, people who read books,
How do you decide that work that was once ignored because all of a sudden... That's the $64,000 question.
You know, in this group that sponsored the conference, the 19th Century Northeast American Women Writers Group, we go round and round with this question.
Well, what kind of standards do we have?
What is it that makes a book interesting?
How do we talk about the aesthetic pleasure we have in reading a book?
I mean, the basic kinds of literary critical questions are not very easy to answer.
How do you know?
What is it that makes you like a book?
Because I think there are very deep kinds of connections that can get established between one's own experience and the experience of the writer.
I don't know that we're always completely aware of exactly what it is that draws us to a writer.
So the task of criticism, you know, is complex.
The other issue is certain kinds of schools of critical thought are more applicable to certain kinds of literature than others.
And so when a certain school of criticism is dominant, those works which are easily approached through that lens can become popular.
I mean, the new criticism of the 20th century is a good example.
Poetry became something that was...
I think, moved to the forefront as a genre because it really responded well to that kind of set of critical questions about ambiguity and that sense of a literary work being very self-contained and you should be able to understand it just in its own terms.
And other kinds of works, like the work of Theodore Dreiser, for example, how would you ever approach that in new critical terms?
The works that were really engaging the issues of social realism and
and certain kinds of economic issues, social justice issues, how do you approach those within the lens of new criticism?
You can't.
So those works tend to be not, then, in the canon when that school of criticism is dominant.
Let's just take Stowe as your own... Now, for years, virtually all of our other work has been largely dismissed, right?
That's right.
Except for Uncle Tom's Cabin, and even then there are people who
suggest that Uncle Tom's Cabin is more of a socially, culturally important book than it is a literary book.
I mean, I know you dispute that, but let's just talk about Stowe as an example of how you have worked to actually look at the body of her work.
I think this is a valid area that you're looking into.
Well, it's a good example of the way in which, when fashions change... Let's hope it is closer so it doesn't pick up the... You want to push the people... Did you do my work?
No.
We've got construction going on.
I have to describe these things.
Yeah, I know.
Well, where to begin on this one?
Certainly in the 20th century, Stowe has been viewed as a sentimental writer.
That is a word that has been used to marginalize the works of lots of the 19th century American women writers who were quite prominent in their time.
It's a term which right now there's a lot of attention being paid by
critics to really looking at what that means.
Instead of just using it to dismiss a work, a lot of the women in the group that I belong to are really trying to say, well, what does it mean to be a sentimental work?
What are the parameters of that?
How does it work?
So one movement is to really see this as a term like realism that is more or less neutral in the way that it resounds, and it's a descriptive rather than a pejorative
If you can rehabilitate a term like that, you can also rehabilitate the writers who have been marginalized by the term.
Explain how you use the word marginalized.
Well, I guess it's just a shorthand way of describing the process that happened to somebody like Stowe, who was
who was such a dominant cultural voice in the 19th century, had such influence, whether she was talking about matters in the American home or slavery.
And then she fell out of favor and in the 20th century canon simply was not read very much.
And so it's that sense of moving from a central cultural place where you have a voice to a place where people know you're there,
people refer to you, but in this pejorative way that basically signals you don't need to read this woman's work.
You know enough to know she wrote a sentimental book, and she rushed through her writing, and there it is, and some people don't engage it.
So when you took on this project, obviously you quite strongly disagreed with that notion, that kind of a notion.
Yeah.
And what brought you to that?
All right, all right.
Actually, reading some of her work and reading her letters.
Apart from Uncle Tom's Cabin.
Yes.
Yeah.
Well, that was part of it.
I don't think I had actually read Uncle Tom's Cabin until the late 70s, probably.
I had never encountered it in graduate school or undergraduate.
No, I'm an English major.
I have a first edition of Uncle Tom's Cabin.
I should have brought it down.
I'm afraid.
No, no, no, no.
You don't put those things in your car.
No.
Yeah, I was an English major, and I was an American Studies major in my PhD work, and I never read it.
What struck me was the wonderful immediacy and originality of her voice, and I was just stunned by that, because I had imagined that it was going to be treacly, that it was going to be
wooden and predictable.
I mean, my idea of sentimental is that there's a very formulaic kind of language and it doesn't have a freshness, and just the opposite of the way her voice, both in her novels and in her letters, struck me.
You really feel that a live person is speaking right to you.
And I thought to myself, I could spend some time with this woman.
I don't think I'd get tired of her.
And it proved to be true.
Did she come to her serendipitously, or as a project?
Well, it was a combination of things.
I had done the book on Jack London and published that in 1982.
I had just come to Trinity in 1980.
I knew that her papers were just ten minutes from the campus.
That was an important consideration, and I was working in the American Studies program here that was working hard to make connections with the city of Hartford, and I thought, well, this is a good way to make a local connection.
And then I read a senior American Studies thesis on single women in Stowe's novels, and in the process of reading that,
I had put before me these wonderful patches from her novels.
I thought, this is wonderful, right?
I had no idea, you know, all these riches.
I wonder what's over in that archive.
So I taught a summer course on 19th century domestic novels and sent my students over there to just do four.
So they were talking literally within, you know, five minutes of where we sit, right?
Yeah, five to ten minutes, yeah.
and just told them, go see what Stowe wrote about domestic things in her letters.
You know, just go see.
And they brought back these wonderful pieces.
I still remember this one letter.
It was just delightful.
Stowe elaborated her domestic difficulties, and then she concluded, so here I am, fighting the good fight against dust and disorganization and the downward tendency of all people and things, hoping for better times by and by.
And it's that kind of...
Ability to just concisely convey what she's going through that engaged me.
Well, as you said, she certainly published a tremendous readership in her lifetime in a couple of times.
That could be the greatest publishing story in the history of American letters, I would think.
I think it is.
And she published many other books.
Yep.
as well.
And what happened?
What happened to her reputation?
I mean, did people tire of her, or was she rejected as being too sentimental or dated or whatever?
It's a combination of things.
I mean, the kind of Christian evangelical vision that informs Uncle Tom's Cabin and some of her other works was less appreciated when the culture became more secularized, when it became a much more
pluralistic kind of culture in terms of Christianity, number one, wasn't the only religion that was contending, or Protestantism.
So that's one issue, but to me the biggest issue is the one I talk about in the keynote, where the standards for judging literature really change, and male gatekeepers come in at the prestigious journals like The Nation and The Atlantic Monthly, and start talking about an aesthetic that could be summed up as art for art's sake,
rather than the use of literature for cultural, social, political purposes, the way Stowe was clearly using it.
I mean, women didn't have the vote at this time.
The only way they could represent themselves was through literature.
You could really influence the way not only people voted, but the way the whole culture moved if you could powerfully put your vision of the world out there.
Stowe does it not only in Uncle Tom's Cabin, she does it in the minister's wooing,
where she attacks Calvinism as a system and tries to really articulate a theology that to her is more congruent with her own experience as a woman and as a mother of a child who drowns.
And she's expected to believe that he's damned in hell forever and she'll never, ever see him again, not even in the afterlife, forget about this life.
And she basically, in a novel,
does a profound work of theological criticism.
Now, women weren't supposed to, you know, be theologians.
They weren't supposed to be in the political sphere.
But through the novel, she was using the only vehicle that was really readily accessible to women to pursue a whole variety of cultural ends.
Had she been allowed, allowed, to write these theological treatises and these
that you just discussed, do you think she would not have been a novelist?
I mean, do you think she chose fiction because that was the only form available to her?
Do you think she would have written essays in nonfiction and whatever?
I think it's both... Yeah, I think she was strongly drawn to fiction because she had an imaginative visual kind of temperament.
She was a teacher, and I think she... You can see, even when she has an opportunity to do a straight essay, she often...
introduces fictional elements like dialogue.
There's a very early letter to the editor she did to the Cincinnati Journal.
She wrote it under a male pseudonym.
She wrote it about these abolitionist riots where they were trying to keep an abolitionist publisher from publishing his paper.
She could have done it any way she wanted because her brother was the temporary editor of the paper and it would have gotten published.
But what she did was to write a dialogue between two men sitting at the dinner table.
And I think she felt that fiction was a better way to get people in, to persuade them, than the straight essay was.
This was a literary exercise for her then.
It would seem.
Yeah.
What do you mean by that?
An exercise of literary skill.
Absolutely.
Oh, absolutely.
Story.
We have talked about story.
Story was important to her.
Yes, it was.
It was very important.
And I think she linked it to the Bible, which is also...
a book full of stories.
I mean, she talks about that book as narratives, and I think she saw herself in Uncle Tom's cabin writing another kind of biblical narrative that had a kind of Christ figure in Uncle Tom.
I mean, the critic Jane Tompkins has argued how she's really doing a kind of biblical typology here, but she viewed story as a good way of persuading people.
And there's a wonderful statement she writes in a letter to the publisher of Uncle Tom's Cabin, Gamaliel Bailey, who is publishing this abolitionist journal where it first appeared.
She said that, my job is simply to describe slavery in as graphic a fashion as I can.
There is no arguing with pictures.
People are persuaded by them whether they need to be or not.
She says this?
Yeah.
Wow, what a person.
This is long before the age of imagery and visual stuff.
I hadn't thought about that.
You know?
Her first desire was to be an artist, as her mother was.
And she actually was a good amateur artist.
So I think she did think very visually and very pictorially.
I mean, I don't think 19th century writers did.
I mean, certainly in terms of motion pictures.
I interviewed Otto Bettman for this book.
He was now 96 years old, who created the Bettman Archive.
which has been acquired by Bill Gates and a little concordance and all that.
And, of course, he was a former rare books librarian at Leipzig in 1933.
Kept that forced him out and came here.
But he talks about, you know, the power of books, but also the power of pictures.
He basically invented this whole concept of visual imagery that you sell to Life magazine, and he created it.
I mean, he basically, as a, you know, medium, as a tool of the medium.
I mean, you say that she was talking about the power of pictures.
That's a very late 20th-century, mid-20th-century statement.
It really is.
I hadn't thought about that.
Yeah, yeah.
Maybe along on that picture.
No, but we are so visually oriented today.
You're absolutely right.
Yeah.
It's amazing.
And that's at a time when her culture was much more oral.
You know, it was a time of the great speech and oratory.
But she was really, you know, thinking in a different vein.
So she is kind of at a different time in a way.
Have you noticed, since the publication of this book, which everybody acknowledges is the, you know, as definitive as anything can get, nothing's ever definitive, I mean, you probably also agree that every generation needs a new biography of important people like Shakespeare or whomever, so nothing is ever the final word, but certainly, but with the publication of this book and the wonderful response that it's had, do you find a
a change in attitude towards her reputation, the interest in her as a literary figure?
It depends.
You know, that was my initial sense.
And certainly for the... I think there's no question that a major biography gives a huge lift
to a literary figure because it provides the context and it focuses attention on them.
And I know that it has done that.
The book also came at a good time in terms of the development of feminist scholarship around women's literature.
I mean, it wasn't right at the beginning of it.
It's been going on for some time now.
So there's all these people who came to the conference and hundreds of others who weren't there.
You know, they're working in this field and it's important to them.
But when you get outside the academy, I don't know that it's made a whole lot of difference, to tell you the truth.
It's hard to gauge that.
I do know it's being read with great appreciation by general readers.
It's been picked up by a lot of book clubs.
I hear that.
The Library of America gave a volume to her, I think.
Yes, they did.
Yeah, they did.
That was actually out before my biography.
Yeah, it was.
I'm sure it was.
Actually, she was one of the earliest.
Right.
They were quite alert.
I mean, I have all of the library in America, because I love them, but I think that was easily one of the first 10 or 12.
Yes, it was quite early on.
You had a woman.
It was before, yeah, it was, because I remember I referred to it when I was writing a grant proposal for this book way back in 82 or 83.
So, yeah, that was one of the early ones.
Well, she has, I mean, I think it has to be said, she really is one of the American women writers who is
in the canon at this point.
I don't think there's a question about that.
No, there's no question about it, but I just bring her up because she's obviously... How about Sarah Arne Jewett, for instance?
There seems to be a resurgence of interest, and a tremendous resurgence of interest.
Right, a lot of interest in her, and several new biographies of her have come out as well.
But I mean, I think she's been beatified.
She's not quite up to the point of saying it yet, but it's... That'll be accurate, yeah.
It just seems to be...
I know the booksellers who are very savvy.
I mean, it is interesting, isn't it, that the smart ones come to conferences like yours, and they, I mean, the antiquarian booksellers, trying to determine who the next collectible, not collectible, but important authors are, and who therefore, I don't know if there's a relationship.
I asked Daniel Aaron that once, and he said, you've got me.
I mean, I had no idea, and
They're quite irrelevant to me.
He wants a good text to read from, whether it's the first edition or anything like that.
But if we could talk about the whole concept of that conference, 19th century women in the 21st century, so you're jumping 100 years, why didn't you include 20th century women there?
Why was it so important to really go back to that?
Why wasn't it more inclusive?
I think the idea of that title was, here we are on the cusp of the
21st century, the 19th century is going to be two centuries back, not just one century back.
How is that going to change, if at all, the way we view these writers?
Is this not a good time to simply assess where we are in our writing and thinking about them?
It wasn't really meant to exclude where we are right now, but just to try to gather up where we are right now and kind of toss it toward the future.
There's a state of position, though.
I mean, the fact that
You are almost 200 years or two centuries behind, and this material is still pretty much out there, waiting to be, I guess, reclaimed.
And maybe that's kind of the thing that you're suggesting as well.
Now, what happens at a conference like this?
Do people come in and offer takes on various writers?
Yes, did you get a program?
No, I'd love a program.
Yes, take that with you.
Yes, tons of papers given on all sorts of subjects.
You'll see that it's really very wide-ranging and diverse.
The program committee made the decision not to have any panels on single authors, which is one attempt to move away from that notion of the canon, but to try to see writers in relationship to one another and through topics that bring...
So you quite deliberately stayed away from individual authors?
Right.
People were surprised there wasn't more on stove here, given the nature of the conference.
But we really wanted to catch the net as broadly as we could.
And so what was the result, in your view?
Was it livelier?
Oh, it was a fabulous conference.
The energy level was just palpable.
To me, it was like a...
A good party, when you listen to the buzz of conversation in the first half hour, and you know, no matter if I spill champagne all over the rug, it's not going to matter.
It's a great party.
That's the way it felt, and it just went that way.
Who do you think, could you recommend people that I should contact?
You know, I was thinking, yeah.
Maybe give me some ideas of where I should go with this.
Sure.
I'm just kind of hoping that I can read.
I'm just trying to, you know, get into this.
Sure.
Enter this whole conversation.
Yeah, I could, you know, the best thing would... You don't have to do it right now.
Right.
There's a list of books that the program committee suggested be on hand in the bookstore.
I can ask my secretary to get that for you.
In their view, you know, the state-of-the-art kinds of things people would be looking for.
And I think you should probably talk to other members of the program committee who are the most thoughtful and articulate spokespeople and thinkers around the issues that you're...
You're probing, and I'd be happy to give you their names and addresses.
Here, I can make a copy for you.
I mean, there's seven of them, six of them, really.
I'm on here, but I'm not.
You're already talking to me.
But I'll make a list of... That'd be great, if you don't mind.
Yeah, no, that's fine.
And I'd like to talk to you again at some point, too, I think, when I'm... Sure.
I'm at the very beginning here.
Sure.
No, I understand.
You've got to go back and forth.
Yeah.
you know, naive and not particularly knowledgeable in this subject, but I think that as we get into it, is it a contentious kind of a thing?
I mean, you mentioned the male gatekeepers who were, I mean, were they, you can't say maliciously, but they were mindfully excluding, you know, people from getting by and getting in.
It can become very polemic and, what's the word, polemical and contentious, yes, when you get into this
Well, the Jane Smiley letters in my keynote probably give you as much a clear sense of how contingent it can be when you dare to suggest that one writer who's a woman is better than writers of men.
I don't think that's necessarily the best way to frame the issues, but it's a very charged political issue.
What books should we teach?
It's a very charged political issue, whether you're talking about a
an elementary school curriculum in a town, or you're talking about college texts.
These issues don't often come to a head in day-to-day teaching, because in a school like Trinity, professors simply teach what they want to teach.
But when you approach this in a conference setting, and when you try to engage these issues, yes, they can become very contentious.
But is this the ultimate issue, the books that do make it into the curriculum?
The books that are taught are required or suggested, and those are, I mean, I personally have to say how shocked I was when Georgetown dropped the requirement that English majors have to take a course in Shakespeare.
They are not required to study Shakespeare to get a degree in English.
I mean, that bothers me.
I don't know how you can study English literature and not study Shakespeare.
And I wonder if, I mean, what brought that about?
I'm not asking you to address yourself to that particular issue.
Maybe you wouldn't want to talk about it, but whatever.
That kind of thing does happen, doesn't it?
Oh, absolutely.
And it reflects a changing sense of what it means to be an educated person.
You know, that is an ideal that changes historically over time.
It used to be to be an educated person or an educated man, because this was a time before women were in the...
You learned Latin and Greek and the classics, you know, the whole classically educated.
And then, you know, the elective system came in, when was it, 1859, I think, and it was an attempt to articulate people with the emerging industrial economy.
I mean, you know, the classical education just didn't cut it now.
You know, with railroads and all this technology, you had to have engineering, you had to have, you know, a professional kind of training.
That has to shift historically.
And it's also probably important that there are groups that champion... I'm thinking of Harold Bloom's book from last year, where he identified the five groups that are threatening the Western canon.
I think the feminist critics were one, and the multicultural were another, and I can't recall the other.
I didn't read it, but I know... How do you respond to that kind of...?
Circling the wagons mentality, in your view?
Are the sides being... Oh, they have been for some time, been dividing up in this way.
The men in the academy didn't have to defend their choices until women started coming in, until minorities started coming in in greater numbers.
So they were able to teach without having their choices questioned.
Now when a new group comes in, it looks like what they're doing is special interest.
The fact that the older group also had their special interest but they weren't challenged dulls the edges of the politics of the already established.
So I think that this is just the kind of thing that happens when groups with different worldviews, different interests, different
senses of their own position in the world come together.
They naturally, just the way they have different worldviews, they have a different sense of what books are important.
And you would hope that you mention a school like Trinity, a liberal arts school.
I mean, a kid should be able to study what the kid wants to study, I guess.
I mean, you shouldn't be restricted to, you know, a very finely focused canon for quotation marks around it.
that somebody has decided is what you should read to the exclusion of other things.
I mean, that's just a statement.
It's a question of any... I think that's a kind of educational philosophy that Trinity and a lot of liberal arts schools would endorse, that there ought to be a kind of wide-ranging sense of cultural literacy.
But... And just the fact that Stoll wasn't taught when you went to... Where did you go to college, by the way?
To Vassar.
I went to Massa.
Was it Brown for my graduate work?
I went to Bates up in Maine, which had a very strong English department that I never encountered still there at all, except in our cultural context.
Golly, and that's close to where she wrote Uncle Tom's Cabin, isn't it?
Oh, it's in Lewiston's name.
How far is that from Brunswick?
Oh, it's about 18 miles.
It's very close.
Bowdoin is right down the street.
Wow.
It's shocking!
Yeah.
I've certainly read Hawthorne and all the others, but... Everybody was reading, yeah.
Of course, the quote, you know, Lincoln, that this, are you the woman?
Yeah.
You know, it was hard to explore.
I mean, of course, when you think of people, one of the pejorative descriptions of a person would be, he's an Uncle Tom.
I think that almost is used to put down the novel.
It is, yeah.
Right.
That's another whole...
issue that I didn't touch on when you asked me how it happened that she fell out of favor, but the Tom plays, the putting of the novel on stage, happened almost as soon as the novel was published and continued well into the 20th century.
That play ran continuously for 90 years or something like that.
And in the 20th century, that was the strongest image many people had of the book.
even though the plays themselves drew on the minstrel tradition, became more and more actually racist in their stereotypes and in their bloodhounds chasing the niggers and all that.
And yet that's what many people thought Uncle Tom's Cabin was.
So part of the Uncle Tom pejorative is coming out of that knowledge.
You almost wonder, when you look at somebody just by contrast, like, I can't
You're talking about something that's just as important.
Context is everywhere.
I'm sorry.
That is a good conversation stopper.
That's funny, isn't it?
Yeah.
An otherwise proper... Yeah, my Andy Warhol touch on it.
You talk about, you know, somebody like Melville, who was basically forgotten in his lifetime.
Yeah.
And he just went the other way, didn't he?
He was discovered in the 20th century.
That's right.
And now they, you know, he's regarded by many to have written a great, a great... And that's an instructive counter-example, because I think in academic circles, a popular writer can't be a good writer.
And so this is the other side of the coin.
Melville went and he quit writing Taipei and Oumu and the popular adventure tales.
He vanished.
Oh, but now we find he's really deep and good.
Oh, I hate that particular.
I mean, I write about new books, too.
I mean, I write a weekly column.
And The Kiss of Death is for a literary writer to be popular.
I mean, to talk to somebody like Pat Conward, who I really like.
I mean, he writes, you like him or dislike him, it's irrelevant.
But he's totally rejected because of the fact that so many people like his... I mean, I think that's a non-standard.
Yeah.
And I think Ann Tyler is almost, now they say,
Because she's made a couple of bestseller lists, it's almost like she's commercial now.
And I think she's the same man, Tyler, she's always been.
Yeah.
I mean, that always seems to apply, doesn't it?
Well, it's a very elitist kind of standard, something that only the few can discern.
That seems to be the definition of good art.
But it's totally opposite of the kind of thing that Stowe was trying to do.
I mean, if you're trying to influence a culture, if you're trying to persuade people, you want to reach as many people as possible.
I've often thought of writing an essay, and I don't know how I do it, but I have all of Celia Thaxter's books, you know.
Oh, really?
I happen to love Celia Thaxter.
Oh, wow.
I get into it through the Hassam, you know, lithographs that he did for An Island Garden.
You know, if you're familiar with that, well, that's a great, great book.
It came out in 1894, just a few months before she died, and it's got 14 color lithographs by Childe Hassam, which makes it exceedingly rare.
and beautiful, but probably the most beautiful 19th-century American book.
Anyway, so I've gone and collected.
I won't see you there.
She was extraordinarily popular in her lifetime.
She really was.
I mean, she wrote for magazines.
She lived in The Apple Show.
And she's a contemporary of Emily Dickinson, and she actually, you know, wrote for The Atlantic.
Yes, I was going to say that.
I know about her, but I've not read one stick.
And Neva Higginson, I think, was a, I mean, there were even points of contact where a
You could almost say, why was Emily Dickinson?
She couldn't even get a damn poem published.
I mean, the two or three items that she had published were done anonymously, and yet Emily Dickinson speaks to us today so powerfully, and Siga is totally unknown.
Do you think her work is good?
Who, Siga?
No, I don't.
It's entertaining, it's amusing, and it's decidedly dated.
Interesting.
You know, she's kind of like a Longfellow in that respect.
But that book, The Island Garden, is a classic.
It's on poetry.
She probably developed the first American garden strictly for beauty.
I mean, it was all flowers.
She raised vegetables or anything like that.
And she was on this little island, Appledore Island, on the Isle of Shoals.
And it's a gorgeous, gorgeous book.
Yale had a huge exhibition around it, based on it five years or so ago.
It has some paintings, and the book is so scarce.
I'm sorry to go off on this tangent, but I mean, here are two names from the 19th century.
She, again, was like Stowe.
Everybody knew her work.
Totally disappeared.
Dickinson, you know, and how does Dickinson get?
All of a sudden, I don't know.
I have the first Dickinson poem poetry, too, which is a treasure.
Dick Hughes on your program, wasn't she?
Yeah, Celia Thaxter is getting more and more attention.
She was definitely, I can't remember which sessions, but I know she was.
Oh, she's starting to take off, actually.
I mean, I've had some exceedingly good offers for the, I don't sell my books, so they're not, it's not an issue.
But Priscilla Jovellis, I said, anything Thaxter, she can sell immediately.
I mean, I have a book, an island garden, that I'm sure Celia signed.
And she died six months after that book came out.
There was only a thousand copies.
Wow.
With these wonderful lithographs by Hassam, which alone, I mean, there were people who raped these books and stripped them.
Oh, dear.
Yeah.
And sell the lithos for like 150 bucks a piece, and there were 14 in there.
Well, it's... Well, I think one of the reasons that people fall out of favor is that they don't have
a network of friends and publishers who are keeping their name before the public.
There's a wonderful essay I would recommend to you.
It's by Jane Tompkins.
It's called Masterpiece Theater, I think the subtitle is The Politics of Hawthorne's Literary Reputation.
And it's in a book by Jane Tompkins called Sensational Designs, published by Oxford.
What?
I'll let you get that down.
What she argues is that if you analyze Hawthorne's career, both during his lifetime when Fields was promoting him, and Fields really made him a kind of canonical writer by collecting his works, putting him out in uniform edition, puffing him all the time, and he really created Hawthorne the great writer.
And then after Hawthorne died, he had
friends from Bowdoin, publishers.
He was a member of the Saturday Club, and through that network had all kinds of friends, again, in publishing, who continually kept his works in print, his name out there.
Now what happens to a woman like Celia Saxter when she dies?
Does she have a Saturday Club?
Does she have people who are interested in keeping her name before the public?
Or there's a kind of network of people who have the power to do this.
No.
So once you fall out of the canon,
Out of the reading public's attention, how do you get back in?
Actually, out of the circle.
She has an interesting story.
She had this little salon on the island, and everybody went there.
The literati, the cognoscenti, the painters, they all went.
And she was very well connected.
She had a son.
Her greatest fear in life was that she would die before she had a retired son.
And she did.
So she was really focused on him.
But I think that this circle worked to keep her stuff viable while they were alive.
But once that's, I mean, I think it just corroborates what you're saying right now.
But once this little circle, very, very influential, this whole Boston cultural elite, you know, and I'm sure they're the reason that she was published at all.
You know, and something like Dickinson, who had no clout, got nothing.
I'm sure Emily would have loved to have been published in her lifetime.
I mean, it would seem to be.
Who knows?
Maybe you feel differently.
I don't know the story of that, whether she wanted to be published or not.
I thought that she had a lot of reservations about that.
Who knows?
But, I mean, she did have a couple of poems out there.
She did.
Higginson put them out there.
Higginson really put her down, too.
Yeah.
He's the one who basically, he was the gatekeeper in her case.
That's true.
And he was also the gatekeeper in Cecilia's case, I think.
I mean, it's a very interesting story, isn't it?
I don't know if I could develop it in some way.
And they were almost exact contemporaries.
They may even have died the same within a year, and they had this... That would make a nice little story, the two of them.
I thought about it, yes.
I like that, yeah.
Just as a... I mean, there's a more popular kind of an essay, not something that would come to...
deeply involved in the scholarship book.
But it does dramatize the issues.
Yeah, and I think it's, to me, it's always been very, because I enjoy seeing the facts.
I have a great affection for her.
I love her attitude.
She's very far ahead of her.
I just thought, this is her idea where flowers, you know, I mean, this garden was because she liked it.
It wasn't, you know, because I have to raise vegetables and feed my family.
And that was really one of the first gardens?
It was, it is, this, her book is considered to be the first book
in the United States printed about a garden that is strictly decorative, yeah, for, you know, beauty.
It's called An Island Garden.
And it's a great, great, I mean, I have written about that, and it fascinates me.
And then the writing is nice, but again, it's the hassle.
I was basically responsible for Nifflin reissuing that book about five or six or seven books, but maybe it's ten years, no time flies.
And it's in print, you know.
I think we did about ten.
That's great.
I mean, they did more in the reprint than it ever did.
In its time.
And it had a wonderful binding a woman, the foremost woman binder of her time.
I can't think of her name right now.
There's little poppies on that cloth, tutorial cloth.
Wonderful.
Gold embossed and green.
Magnificent.
And the designer.
It was basically an all-woman project except, you know, for the Hassan
That's a great, great, great point.
Sorry to go off on that.
Where are we going here?
Sensational Designs, which is the book.
Jane Teal, M-K-A-N-S?
P-K-I-N-S.
Next time I go into Widener, I'll grab it.
Any advice on where I should go?
In terms of talking about the conference?
In the conference, just the general subject of people I should talk to.
Just remind me what the large frame of the book is.
The large frame is... I'm really interested in how, you know, women are working to establish, you know, a body of literature.
How you rediscover things.
How it enters the canon.
How literary works.
go from the total obscurity to being rediscovered.
I'm interested, I guess, also in the, you know, the factions that have developed.
I mean, you talk about the gatekeepers.
That's a buzzword.
I'm interested in that.
I'm interested in finding about, you know, to see how politically charged the... Well, you know, an excellent person to talk to here would be Paul Water, who is also at Trinity.
He did the Heath Anthology of American Literature.
Okay.
Are you familiar with what he tried to do there?
No.
He put together this seminar at Yale back in 1982, which became the hub of his editorial board, and basically wanted to figure out how you made an anthology that was a lot more inclusive than the anthologies of American literature of the past.
said about recovering writers, and he's probably the foremost person in this country in terms of really thinking about this whole issue of recovery on a grand scale.
Yeah, and he's very articulate.
He was president of the American Studies Association this past year, so he's very nationally prominent as well.
And what was the book?
It was called The Heat?
This is it.
Oh, there it is.
This is always the second volume of it.
Wow.
And who is Heat?
I don't know who the Heat is.
The publisher, Heat.
They do a lot of... Let me just give you information, if I may.
Go ahead.
Oh, out of Lexington.
Do you see Heat and Cafe?
I mean, it's huge compared to, I mean, there's two volumes of this size, but what we did at this conference, I mean, if you just look at the, if you look at, here's the beginning, Literature of Discovery and Exploration.
Wow.
It's a different kind of, I mean, just look at the people included.
What we did at the conference was really brainstorm, well, how do you have to change the categories?
Because, you know, if you just think in terms of naturalism or the old literary labels, you don't include everybody.
It looks like there's an excellent... To the readers, you know, it looks like there's a great introduction here.
I suspect a good deal of what you're saying is articulated.
Oh, this is great.
I never heard of it.
Yeah, this has gotten a lot of play.
It's been very successful.
This is the second edition you're looking at here because the first edition was very successful.
They also put out a newsletter so the people who are using it and teaching it in classes can be in touch with one another about how they've used it or what strategies have been successful.
So it's like a whole institution that has really... And how has it been accepted out there?
Paul could probably tell you more about that.
My sense is it's been quite successful.
L-A-U-T-E-R.
Yeah, he's in the English department, that building that you found.
The one that I was in?
Yes.
Yes, he lives in New York.
I can give you his numbers.
Okay.
I might wait until the school's back.
Yeah, it'll be easier for you.
I'm in New York all the time.
Do you use email?
I do.
He's an email freak.
I am getting that way, actually.
Where's my directory?
Oh, this is going to be very helpful.
This is very good.
Yeah, I would say Paul and the program committee are among the people I know in this country who are most involved in these issues of the canon and women's literature.
Paul has been one of the few men involved in our group right from the beginning.
He was part of the conference?
Yeah, he was part of the conference, and also he's been part of this group, this 19th century American women writers group that got the idea to have the conference.
Are you making any headway in publishing the... Yes, it's right over here, Dr. Potter.
Oh, good.
Excellent.
Thank you.
Dr. Kroll.
While you're doing that, why don't I run a copy of this?
Okay, if you don't mind, that'd be great.
Thanks.
Copy machine right in front of you.
2303.
Is the phone number?
Yeah, that hurt a bit.